<a class="anchor" id="programming_paradigms"></a>
## Programming Paradigms

A programming paradigm can be termed as an approach or a style of writing code. Most of the modern programming languages fall into two general paradigms: imperative (procedural, OOP etc.) and declarative (functional etc.).

Popular examples of **declarative languages** are database query languages such as **SQL, markup languages like HTML and CSS, and in functional and logic programming languages**.

Popular examples of **imperative languages** are **Java,C++ and C#**.

Declarative programming is a paradigm describing **WHAT** the program does, without explicitly specifying its control flow. Imperative programming is a paradigm describing **HOW** the program should do something by explicitly specifying each instruction (or statement) step by step, which mutate the program's state.

- **Imperative**
  
| Pros | Cons |
|:--|:--|
| The syntax is easier to grasp for programmers coming from most languages. | The code is usually longer. |
| Using the imperative code flow enables more control over what occurs in the blocks, including stopping the loops when needed. | The code is not generic and reusable. |
| Developers are usually more comfortable with this way of programming | Code is harder to read. |
| Shorter debugging, due to smaller stack traces. | Harder debugging overall, due to state mutations and "less-controlled" changes to the world. |


- **Declarative**
  
|Pros|Cons|
|:--|:--|
|The code is usually shorter.|Developers are usually less comfortable with this way of programming|
|Code is very generic and reusable.|Longer debugging, due to bigger stack traces|
|Code is clearer and easier to read.||
|Declarative code is very appropriate for many Python frameworks and state management systems such as Django. In javascript we can name React.||

# Object-Oriented Programming in Python 
**Object-oriented programming (OOP)** is a method of structuring a program by bundling related properties and behaviors into individual objects.
Conceptually, objects are like the components of a system. Think of a program as a factory assembly line of sorts. At each step of the assembly line a system component processes some material, ultimately transforming raw material into a finished product. An object contains data, like the raw or preprocessed materials at each step on an assembly line, and behavior, like the action each assembly line component performs.
## Core Concept of OOP in Python{#core_concept_of_oop_in_python}
- **Classes**: A blueprint for creating objects. A class encapsulates data for the object.
- **Objects**: Instances of classes. An object is a particular instance of a class.
- **Attributes** (Properties): An attribute is a characteristic of an object.
- **Methods** (Functions): A method is a function (behavior or actions that an object can perform) that is part of a class.
- `self`: A reference to the current instance of the class. It is used to access variables that belong to the class.
- `__init__`: A special method in Python classes that is called when a new instance of the class is created. It initializes the object's attributes.
- **Encapsulation**: Encapsulation refers to the bundling of data (attributes) and methods that operate on the data into a single unit or class and restricting access to some of the object's components.
  - **Example:** A `BankAccount` class encapsulates the balance as an attribute and provides methods to `deposit()` and `withdraw()` money. It hides the balance from direct access from the outside, safely controlling how it's altered.
  - Encapsulation enables data hiding by using **access modifiers** (public, private, and protected). Private attributes or methods are not accessible from outside the class, preventing accidental or malicious modifications and ensuring data integrity
- **Inheritance**: Inheritance allows a class (derived/child class) to acquire the properties and methods of another class (base/parent class). This promotes code reusability and hierarchical classifications.
  - We have four types of inheritance in Python: single, multiple, multilevel, and hierarchical inheritance.
- **Polymorphism:** Polymorphism allows objects of different classes to be treated as objects of a common superclass. This enables a single interface to represent different data types or objects.
  - **Example:** A `Shape` superclass with subclasses `Circle` and `Rectangle`. Both subclasses have a `calculate_area()` method, but each calculates the area differently. The `calculate_area()` method can be called on any `Shape` object, and the correct implementation is automatically used based on the object's type.
- **Abstraction:** Abstraction focuses on the essential features of an object while hiding the complex implementation details. It simplifies the interface for interacting with objects by providing a high-level view.
  - **Example:** A `Vehicle` class may have `start()` and `stop()` methods, abstracting the complex internal mechanisms of starting and stopping the vehicle.
> Abstraction vs Encapsulation: While both aim to hide details, abstraction hides complexity by showing only essential features, whereas encapsulation hides the internal state and requires accessing data through specified methods

## Pros and Cons of OOP {#pros_and_cons_of_oop}
| Pros | Cons |
|:--|:--|
Modularity for easier troubleshooting | Steeper learning curve for beginners
Reusability of code through inheritance | Larger program size (not good for limited memory resources) 
Refactoring is easier | Slower execution
Flexibility through polymorphism | Not suitable for small programs
Effective problem-solving (Abstraction simplifies complexity) | Complex to design and implement
Encapsulation keeps data safe | |

- **Situations Where OOP is Beneficial:**

  - Large and complex software systems
  - Applications with GUIs
  - Software that requires flexibility and scalability
- **Situations Where OOP May Not Be the Best Approach:**

- Simple scripts and utilities
- Performance-critical applications: Real-time systems, such as operating systems or embedded systems, where performance is critical, might be better served by procedural or functional programming to reduce overhead and increase execution speed.





<a class="anchor" id="define_a_class_in_python"></a>

## Define a Class in Python
Classes are used to create user-defined data structures. Classes define functions called **methods**, which identify the behaviors and actions that an object created from the class can perform with its data.
A class is a blueprint for how something should be defined. It doesn’t necessarily contain any data. The `Dog` class specifies that a name and an age are necessary for defining a dog, but it doesn’t contain the name or age of any specific dog.
While the class is the blueprint, an **instance** is an object that is built from a class and contains real data. An instance of the `Dog` class is not a blueprint anymore. It’s an actual dog with a name, like Miles, who’s four years old.

All class definitions start with the ‍`class‍` keyword, which is followed by the name of the class and a colon. Any code that is indented below the class definition is considered part of the class’s body.

Here’s an example of a ‍`Dog` class:

```python
class Dog:
    pass
```

The body of the `Dog` class consists of a single statement: the `pass` keyword. `pass` is often used as a placeholder indicating where code will eventually go. It allows you to run this code without Python throwing an error.
> **Note:** Python class names are written in CapitalizedWords notation (**Pascal** case) by convention. For example, a class for a specific breed of dog like the Jack Russell Terrier would be written as `JackRussellTerrier`.

The properties that all `Dog` objects must have are defined in a method called `.__init__()`. Every time a new `Dog` object is created, `.__init__()` sets the initial **state** of the object by assigning the values of the object’s properties. That is, `.__init__()` initializes each new instance of the class.

You can give `.__init__()` any number of parameters, but the first parameter will always be a variable called `self`. When a new class instance is created, the instance is automatically passed to the self parameter in `.__init__()` so that new **attributes** can be defined on the object.

```python 
class Dog:
    # Class attribute
    species = "Canis familiaris"
    # Instance attribute
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
```

1. `self.name = name` creates an attribute called `name` and assigns to it the value of the `name` parameter.
2. `self.age = age` creates an attribute called age and assigns to it the value of the `age` parameter.
3. Class attributes are related to all instances of the class, while instance attributes are related to specific instances of the class.

Attributes created in `.__init__()` are called **instance attributes**. An instance attribute’s value is specific to a particular instance of the class. All `Dog` objects have a `name` and an `age`, but the values for the `name` and `age` attributes will vary depending on the `Dog` instance.

```python
class Dog:
    # Class attribute
    species = "Canis familiaris"
    dog_cnt = 0

    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
        #using the class attribute
        Dog.dog_cnt += 1
```

On the other hand, **class attributes** are attributes that have the same value for all class instances. You can define a class attribute by assigning a value to a variable name outside of `.__init__()`.

Class attributes are defined directly beneath the first line of the class name and are indented by four spaces. They must always be assigned an initial value. When an instance of the class is created, class attributes are automatically created and assigned to their initial values.

<a class="anchor" id="instantiate_an_object_in_python"></a>
## Instantiate an Object in Python

Creating a new object from a class is called **instantiating** an object. You can instantiate a new `Dog` object by typing the name of the class, followed by opening and closing parentheses:

```python 
# Creating a new instance (object) of a DOG class: 
# this will assign a memory address to the new object
Dog("Pishi", 21) 

# Error in Instantiating a new object of the Dog class
Dog() 
--- ANS ---
TypeError: __init__() missing 2 required positional arguments: 'name' and 'age'
----------- 
# Assigning a variable to a new object
a = Dog("seed", 19)

```

> The Dog class’s `.__init__()` method has three parameters, so why are only two arguments passed to it in the example?
> When you instantiate a Dog object, Python creates a new instance and passes it to the first parameter of `.__init__()`. This essentially removes the `self` parameter, so you only need to worry about the `name` and `age` parameters.

After you create the `Dog` instances, you can access their instance attributes using **dot notation**:

```python
a.name
a.age
a.species
--- ANS ---
'seed'
19
'Canis familiaris'
------------------
#Although the attributes are guaranteed to exist, their values _can_ be changed dynamically:
a.age = 10

```

<a class="anchor" id="instance_methods"></a>
### Instance Methods
**Instance methods** are functions that are defined inside a class and can only be called from an instance of that class. Just like `.__init__()`, an instance method’s first parameter is always `self`.

```python
class Dog:
    # ------------------------------------ #
    # Leave other parts of Dog class as-is #
    # ------------------------------------ #
    species = "Canis familiaris"

    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age

    # Instance method
    def description(self):
        return f"{self.name} is {self.age} years old"

    # Another instance method
    def speak(self, sound):
        return f"{self.name} says {sound}"
    
    # -------------------------------------- #
    # Replace .description() with __str__()  #
    # -------------------------------------- #
    def __str__(self):
        return f"{self.name} is {self.age} years old"
```
This `Dog` class has two instance methods:

1. `.description()` returns a string displaying the name and age of the dog.
2. `.speak()` has one parameter called `sound`
3. `.__str__()` a special instance method for printing.
and returns a string containing the dog’s name and the sound the dog makes.

```python
miles = Dog("Miles", 4)
miles.description()
miles.speak("Woof Woof")
print(miles)
--- ANS ---
'Miles is 4 years old'
'Miles says Woof Woof'
'Miles is 4 years old'
```

Methods like `.__init__()` and `.__str__()` are called **dander methods** because they begin and end with double underscores. There are many dander methods that you can use to customize classes in Python. Although too advanced a topic for a beginning Python tutorial, understanding dander methods is an important part of mastering object-oriented programming in Python.

### Some Other Notes
> Everything in Python is an object.

Without a doubt, when writing a class you'll always want to go for new-style classes. The perks of doing so are numerous, to list some of them:

- Support for descriptors. Specifically, the following constructs are made possible with descriptors:
- `classmethod`: A method that receives the class as an implicit argument instead of the instance.
- `staticmethod`: A method that does not receive the implicit argument self as a first argument.
- properties with property: Create functions for managing the getting, setting and deleting of an attribute.
- `__slots__`: Saves memory consumptions of a class and also results in faster attribute access. Of course, it does impose limitations.
- The `__new__` static method: lets you customize how new class instances are created.
- Method resolution order (MRO): in what order the base classes of a class will be searched when trying to resolve which method to call.
- Related to MRO, super calls. Also see, super() considered super.


The `dir` function's output shows the class methods and attributes.
Python provides a `__bases__` attribute on each class that can be used to obtain a list of classes the given class inherits.

- All classes in Python are objects of the type class, and this type class is called Metaclass.
- Each class in Python, by default, inherits from the `object` base class.

`type` and `object` are special in that they are the base of the type hierarchy. Everything is an instance of `object`. Every type/class is an instance of `type`. So `type` is an instance of `object` and `object` is also an instance of `type`. There is also a cycle: `type` and `object` are instances of each other. This kind of mutual inheritance is not normally possible, but that's the way it is for these fundamental types in Python: they break the rules.


**Object creation in Python is a two-step process**. In the first step, Python creates the object, and in the second step, it initializes the object. Most of the time, we are only interested in the second step (i.e., the initialization step). Python uses the `__new__` method in the first step (i.e., object creation) and uses the `__init__` method in the second step (i.e., initialization).

The `__call__` method is a magic method in Python that is used to make the objects callable. Callable objects are objects that can be called. For example, functions are callable objects, as they can be called using the round parenthesis.